Project management.
We talked in an earlier section about the difference between a project,
a bug or a planned application maintenance.
In this section we'll focus on larger activities that warrant
focus and attention to be called a project.
Now let's do a couple of definitions.
Project management is the planning and the organization of a
company's resources to move a specific task,
event, service, or product towards completion.
Okay the short version, the process of managing projects.
Now here is a simple definition or a project,
a temporary group activity designed to produce a unique product,
service or result.
Now let's note some key words, temporary implies a start and end date.
Group implies more than one person, usually a team.
And unique, a problem is something special in that it is not a routine operation,
but a specific set of activities designed to accomplish a singular goal.
Okay, let's get into a little more detail.
So when should an activity be a project?
Let's explore some simple guidelines.
Now every company or organization is different,
so figure out what works for you.
Basically, you'll want to place attention and focus on a key activity,
that's why it's a project.
The activity is just too important to have a
developer not only develop software,
but to also worry about a lot of other stuff.
Typically a larger activity of greater complexity will
warrant an activity to be a project.
If things are getting complex,
then placing someone on it to ensure those complexities
are managed or solved or removed.
When you need someone to look over it and ensure the milestones,
budgets, and schedules are met and a customer is happy.
Again, milestones, budgets, and schedules,
these aren't software engineering tasks,
these are project management tasks.
And a great coupling is great software engineers with a great
project manager and boy you have a win/win.
Now sometimes size matters.
A very large activity would warrant a person to provide the necessary oversight.
In one of my client's organizations an activity over
40 hours was consider a project, in others it was over 200 hours.
So you decide what makes sense for you in your organization.
Financial,
in other companies it maybe the dollar size or impact to revenue or impact
to operating expenses that makes something a project.
This is good as well.
Now an activity may also be political,
that you better have someone overseeing it at all times.
The activity may not be that important to the company or that big,
but the user just so happens to be the CEO,
so you get my drift.
Now you don't need one project manager for every project necessarily.
In our scenario of your five person team,
maybe one person has the PM or project management skills and spends part
or full-time on the function of project management,
and would in fact manage multiple projects of various sizes.
And maybe you spend some of your time as the manager
running a project or two as well.
Now let's check out the roles of a project manager.
So what does a project manager actually do?
What are the rules they need to perform?
Okay, here's a few.
They need to create clear and attainable project objectives.
They need to be the central point of contact for all project communication.
They're going to probably wear many hats and juggle many balls,
so they need to be skilled in many areas.
They're also responsible for the planning,
the control, the execution and ultimately the closing of any project.
That is a lot of potential work.
Also they need to be a champion of the project and a change agent since
projects are generally bigger or chunkier pieces of work and since they
also have more significant political, financial,
and business impacts, that is really big change,
it is important for the PM to be a champion of that change.
Now here are a few more responsibilities I would like
to talk about on the next slide.
Here are a few more roles or responsibilities of a project manager.
They're responsible for accomplishing the stated project objectives.
On the previous slide, they are responsible for creating the project objectives,
but they also are responsible for actually accomplishing those objectives.
Responsible for project requirements of the customer or client.
It's very important to get those requirements correct and we're talked
throughout this module about the importance of quality requirements.
Responsible for bridging the gap between the project team and the
client or customer and the technical team as well.
So having great communication and leadership skills is essential for a good PM.
Also managing the constraints of cost, time, scope, and quality.
Now that is a challenge since we all know the scope seems to
always grow and the time gets shorter.
Perform issue and risk identification and remediation.
Stuff will always go wrong and must be identified,
tracked, reported out to management and customers and remediated,
that is fixed.
Okay, here's an interesting quote.
As a PM you'll be doing a lot of planning, so here's a great quote.
"Plans are of little importance, but planning is essential,
" by one of my favs Winston Churchill.
So I would like to read it as this, plans are of little importance,
but planning is absolutely essential.
The point is that the planning process that you will do with your customers,
users, team members,
and other subject matter experts is actually more
important than the plans themselves.
Okay, have I piqued your interest in project management?
Let's see where you can learn more about project management.
As I mentioned each section in this module could in fact be a complete course.
Well I would like to recommend to you another one of my Pluralsight
courses titled Project Management for Software Engineers,
which is a nice adjunct or companion course for this course. Now I'd like to make a quick comment on Agile.